docs/VOICE-STREAMING.md, before:

# Voice Streaming Architecture

How real-time voice streaming works in Claudia — from prompt to audio playback.

## Overview

When a client sends a prompt with a `voice.speak` tag on the request envelope, text streams through Claude → sentence chunker → Cartesia TTS → WAV audio chunks → back to the originating client. The voice extension owns its own **connection-scoped routing** via `streamOrigins` — audio only reaches the client that requested it.

## Flow Diagram

```
┌─────────┐     ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  Client  │────▶│ Gateway (port 30086)                                    │
│ (Web/iOS)│     │                                                          │
│          │     │  1. Stamps connectionId + tags on request envelope       │
│          │     │  2. Routes to session extension                          │
│          │     │  3. Generic gateway.caller routing for scoped delivery   │
│          │     │                                                          │
│          │◀────│  voice.* events with source: "gateway.caller" +          │
│          │     │  connectionId → routed ONLY to originating client        │
└─────────┘     └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                        │                           ▲
                        ▼                           │
              ┌──────────────────┐        ┌──────────────────────┐
              │ Session Extension │        │ Voice Extension       │
              │                  │        │                       │
              │ Runs Claude CLI  │───────▶│ Subscribes to:        │
              │ Emits session.*  │ events │ session.*.content_    │
              │ events as text   │        │  block_start/         │
              │ streams in       │        │  delta/stop           │
              └──────────────────┘        │                       │
                                          │ Checks event.tags for │
                                          │ "voice.speak" before  │
                                          │ activating TTS        │
                                          │                       │
                                          │ ┌───────────────────┐ │
                                          │ │ streamOrigins:    │ │
                                          │ │ Map<streamId,     │ │
                                          │ │     connectionId> │ │
                                          │ └───────────────────┘ │
                                          │                       │
                                          │ ┌───────────────────┐ │
                                          │ │ SentenceChunker   │ │
                                          │ │ Splits text       │ │
                                          │ │ on . ! ? \n\n     │ │
                                          │ └───────┬───────────┘ │
                                          │         ▼             │
                                          │ ┌───────────────────┐ │
                                          │ │ Cartesia WS       │ │
                                          │ │ Sonic 3.0         │ │
                                          │ │ Per-sentence      │ │
                                          │ │ connections       │ │
                                          │ └───────┬───────────┘ │
                                          │         ▼             │
                                          │ PCM → WAV → emit     │
                                          │ voice.audio_chunk     │
                                          │ with connectionId +   │
                                          │ source: gateway.caller│
                                          └───────────────────────┘
```

## Step-by-Step

### 1. Client sends prompt with voice tag

```json
{
  "type": "req",
  "method": "session.send_prompt",
  "params": { "sessionId": "ses_...", "content": "Tell me a story" },
  "tags": ["voice.speak"]
}
```

Tags are **envelope data** — they live outside the method params. The gateway stamps `connectionId` on the envelope and propagates `tags` through the NDJSON bus. No Zod schema changes are needed for tags.

### 2. Session extension streams text

The session extension starts a Claude CLI query and emits events as text streams in:

```
session.{sessionId}.content_block_start  → { content_block: { type: "text" } }
session.{sessionId}.content_block_delta  → { delta: { type: "text_delta", text: "Once upon" } }
session.{sessionId}.content_block_delta  → { delta: { type: "text_delta", text: " a time..." } }
session.{sessionId}.message_stop         → {}
```

Each event carries `connectionId` and `tags` on the envelope (auto-stamped by the extension host from `currentConnectionId` and `currentTags`). Session doesn't need to know about voice — tags propagate automatically.

### 3. Gateway forwards to voice extension

The gateway's `handleExtensionEvent` broadcasts these events to all extensions. The voice extension subscribes to `session.*.content_block_start`, `session.*.content_block_delta`, and `session.*.message_stop` using middle wildcards.

### 4. Voice extension processes text

**On `content_block_start`:** Voice checks `event.tags?.includes("voice.speak")`. If the tag is present and block type is `"text"`, voice calls `startStream(sessionId, event.connectionId)`:

- Generates an 8-character `streamId`
- Stores `streamId → connectionId` in `streamOrigins` map
- Creates a `SentenceChunker`
- Emits `voice.stream_start` with `{ connectionId, source: "gateway.caller" }`

**On `content_block_delta`:** Text deltas feed into the sentence chunker:

```
"Once upon a time. There was a " → ["Once upon a time."]  (remainder buffered)
"princess. She"                  → ["There was a princess."]
```

Complete sentences are queued and processed serially.

**On `message_stop`:** Flushes any remaining buffered text, waits for the queue to drain, then emits `voice.stream_end`.

### 5. Cartesia TTS (per-sentence WebSocket)

Each sentence gets its own Cartesia WebSocket connection:

```
Voice Extension                          Cartesia API
     │                                       │
     │──── connect() ──────────────────────▶│
     │──── startStream() ─────────────────▶│
     │──── sendText("Once upon a time.") ──▶│
     │◀─── chunk { audio: "base64PCM" } ────│  (repeated)
     │◀─── done ────────────────────────────│
     │──── endStream() ───────────────────▶│
     │                                       │
```

PCM chunks (16-bit, 24kHz, mono) are converted to WAV and emitted as `voice.audio_chunk` events.

### 6. Connection-scoped routing (voice extension → gateway.caller)

The voice extension owns its routing via the `streamOrigins` map:

```typescript
// Voice extension state
streamOrigins: Map<string, string>; // Map<streamId, connectionId>

// Helper for all voice emits
function callerEmitOptions(streamId: string) {
  return {
    connectionId: streamOrigins.get(streamId),
    source: "gateway.caller",
  };
}
```

**When starting a stream:** Voice stores `streamId → connectionId` in `streamOrigins`.

**When emitting audio chunks:** Voice emits with explicit `connectionId` + `source: "gateway.caller"`:

```typescript
ctx.emit(
  "voice.audio_chunk",
  { audio, format, index, streamId, sessionId },
  callerEmitOptions(streamId),
);
```

**Gateway's role is purely generic:** When any event has `source === "gateway.caller"` + `connectionId`, the gateway routes it only to that specific WebSocket connection. The gateway has zero voice-specific code — no `voiceStreamOrigins`, no voice event type checks.

**Cleanup:** `streamOrigins.delete(streamId)` on `voice.stream_end` and `voice.stream_abort`.

### 7. Client audio playback

**Web (useAudioPlayback hook):**

- Decodes base64 WAV → `AudioContext.decodeAudioData()`
- Schedules each buffer on a playback timeline cursor
- Gapless playback: cursor advances by `buffer.duration` after each chunk
- Edge fade (64 samples) reduces clicks at chunk boundaries

**iOS (GatewayClient.swift):**

- Receives `voice.audio_chunk` events with base64 WAV data
- Callbacks to `onAudioChunk` handler for native audio playback

### 8. Audio persistence

After all chunks are emitted and the queue drains, the voice extension concatenates all PCM chunks and saves a complete WAV file:

```
~/.claudia/audio/{sessionId}/{streamId}.wav
```

This enables `voice.replay` to re-serve previously generated audio without re-synthesizing.

## Tags + connectionId Envelope Propagation

Tags and connectionId are **envelope data** — they flow outside method params, through the NDJSON bus:

```
Client WS request (includes tags: ["voice.speak"])
  → Gateway stamps connectionId + forwards tags on NDJSON envelope
  → Extension host sets currentConnectionId + currentTags from envelope
  → Session emits events → extension host auto-stamps connectionId + tags
  → Gateway forwards events to voice with tags on GatewayEvent envelope
  → Voice checks event.tags?.includes("voice.speak") → activates TTS
  → Voice stores streamId → connectionId in streamOrigins
  → Voice emits audio events with explicit { connectionId, source: "gateway.caller" }
  → Gateway routes to specific WS connection via generic gateway.caller mechanism
```

The extension host automatically stamps `currentConnectionId` and `currentTags` on all emitted events. During event/request handler dispatch, it sets these from the inbound envelope and restores them after. Explicit overrides in `ctx.emit()` options take precedence over auto-stamped values — this is how voice emits with a specific connectionId from its `streamOrigins` map.

## Opting In to Voice

Voice is **per-request opt-in** via the `voice.speak` tag. There is no server-side `autoSpeak` config.

- **Web chat:** UI sends `tags: ["voice.speak"]` when voice mode is enabled for the workspace
- **iOS voice mode:** Sends `tags: ["voice.speak"]` on every prompt (it's a voice-first interface)
- **CLI / iMessage:** No voice tag — responses are text-only
- **Per-workspace control:** Web chat can toggle voice on/off per workspace; the tag is only sent when voice is active

If no `voice.speak` tag is present, the voice extension ignores the event entirely — no TTS, no stream, no audio.

## Key Files

| Component           | File                                        | Purpose                                                                            |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Event propagation   | `packages/gateway/src/index.ts`             | `handleExtensionEvent()`, `broadcastEvent()` — generic `gateway.caller` routing    |
| Tags + connectionId | `packages/extension-host/src/index.ts`      | Auto-stamps `currentConnectionId` + `currentTags` on emitted events                |
| Voice extension     | `extensions/voice/src/index.ts`             | `streamOrigins` map, event subscriptions, stream lifecycle, Cartesia orchestration |
| Sentence chunker    | `extensions/voice/src/sentence-chunker.ts`  | Splits streaming text on sentence boundaries                                       |
| Cartesia client     | `extensions/voice/src/cartesia-stream.ts`   | Per-sentence WebSocket TTS with Sonic 3.0                                          |
| Audio store         | `extensions/voice/src/audio-store.ts`       | Saves complete WAV files for replay                                                |
| Web playback        | `packages/ui/src/hooks/useAudioPlayback.ts` | Web Audio API timeline scheduling                                                  |
| iOS client          | `clients/ios/VoiceMode/GatewayClient.swift` | Native event handling + audio callbacks                                            |
| Shared types        | `packages/shared/src/types.ts`              | `GatewayEvent` with `tags?: string[]`, `ExtensionContext.emit()` options           |

Commit message:

fix: propagate tags through ctx.call() hops + session async events
Three fixes from code review:

1. Tags now flow through ctx.call() chain: extension host includes
   currentTags on outbound call messages, gateway extension-host
   extracts and forwards tags in handleCall meta, start.ts passes
   tags to extensions.handleMethod.

2. Session extension captures tags (via new ctx.tags getter) at
   prompt time and re-applies them on async stream events via emit
   options. Also moves connectionId from payload to emit options
   where it belongs (envelope data, not extension payload).

3. Docs updated to use "for example" language for client tag usage
   since web chat hasn't been wired up yet.

docs/VOICE-STREAMING.md, after:

# Voice Streaming Architecture

How real-time voice streaming works in Claudia — from prompt to audio playback.

## Overview

When a client sends a prompt with a `voice.speak` tag on the request envelope, text streams through Claude → sentence chunker → Cartesia TTS → WAV audio chunks → back to the originating client. The voice extension owns its own **connection-scoped routing** via `streamOrigins` — audio only reaches the client that requested it.

## Flow Diagram

```
┌─────────┐     ┌──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┐
│  Client  │────▶│ Gateway (port 30086)                                    │
│ (Web/iOS)│     │                                                          │
│          │     │  1. Stamps connectionId + tags on request envelope       │
│          │     │  2. Routes to session extension                          │
│          │     │  3. Generic gateway.caller routing for scoped delivery   │
│          │     │                                                          │
│          │◀────│  voice.* events with source: "gateway.caller" +          │
│          │     │  connectionId → routed ONLY to originating client        │
└─────────┘     └──────────────────────────────────────────────────────────┘
                        │                           ▲
                        ▼                           │
              ┌──────────────────┐        ┌──────────────────────┐
              │ Session Extension │        │ Voice Extension       │
              │                  │        │                       │
              │ Runs Claude CLI  │───────▶│ Subscribes to:        │
              │ Emits session.*  │ events │ session.*.content_    │
              │ events as text   │        │  block_start/         │
              │ streams in       │        │  delta/stop           │
              └──────────────────┘        │                       │
                                          │ Checks event.tags for │
                                          │ "voice.speak" before  │
                                          │ activating TTS        │
                                          │                       │
                                          │ ┌───────────────────┐ │
                                          │ │ streamOrigins:    │ │
                                          │ │ Map<streamId,     │ │
                                          │ │     connectionId> │ │
                                          │ └───────────────────┘ │
                                          │                       │
                                          │ ┌───────────────────┐ │
                                          │ │ SentenceChunker   │ │
                                          │ │ Splits text       │ │
                                          │ │ on . ! ? \n\n     │ │
                                          │ └───────┬───────────┘ │
                                          │         ▼             │
                                          │ ┌───────────────────┐ │
                                          │ │ Cartesia WS       │ │
                                          │ │ Sonic 3.0         │ │
                                          │ │ Per-sentence      │ │
                                          │ │ connections       │ │
                                          │ └───────┬───────────┘ │
                                          │         ▼             │
                                          │ PCM → WAV → emit     │
                                          │ voice.audio_chunk     │
                                          │ with connectionId +   │
                                          │ source: gateway.caller│
                                          └───────────────────────┘
```

## Step-by-Step

### 1. Client sends prompt with voice tag

```json
{
  "type": "req",
  "method": "session.send_prompt",
  "params": { "sessionId": "ses_...", "content": "Tell me a story" },
  "tags": ["voice.speak"]
}
```

Tags are **envelope data** — they live outside the method params. The gateway stamps `connectionId` on the envelope and propagates `tags` through the NDJSON bus. No Zod schema changes are needed for tags.

### 2. Session extension streams text

The session extension starts a Claude CLI query and emits events as text streams in:

```
session.{sessionId}.content_block_start  → { content_block: { type: "text" } }
session.{sessionId}.content_block_delta  → { delta: { type: "text_delta", text: "Once upon" } }
session.{sessionId}.content_block_delta  → { delta: { type: "text_delta", text: " a time..." } }
session.{sessionId}.message_stop         → {}
```

Each event carries `connectionId` and `tags` on the envelope (auto-stamped by the extension host from `currentConnectionId` and `currentTags`). Session doesn't need to know about voice — tags propagate automatically.

### 3. Gateway forwards to voice extension

The gateway's `handleExtensionEvent` broadcasts these events to all extensions. The voice extension subscribes to `session.*.content_block_start`, `session.*.content_block_delta`, and `session.*.message_stop` using middle wildcards.

### 4. Voice extension processes text

**On `content_block_start`:** Voice checks `event.tags?.includes("voice.speak")`. If the tag is present and block type is `"text"`, voice calls `startStream(sessionId, event.connectionId)`:

- Generates an 8-character `streamId`
- Stores `streamId → connectionId` in `streamOrigins` map
- Creates a `SentenceChunker`
- Emits `voice.stream_start` with `{ connectionId, source: "gateway.caller" }`

**On `content_block_delta`:** Text deltas feed into the sentence chunker:

```
"Once upon a time. There was a " → ["Once upon a time."]  (remainder buffered)
"princess. She"                  → ["There was a princess."]
```

Complete sentences are queued and processed serially.

**On `message_stop`:** Flushes any remaining buffered text, waits for the queue to drain, then emits `voice.stream_end`.

### 5. Cartesia TTS (per-sentence WebSocket)

Each sentence gets its own Cartesia WebSocket connection:

```
Voice Extension                          Cartesia API
     │                                       │
     │──── connect() ──────────────────────▶│
     │──── startStream() ─────────────────▶│
     │──── sendText("Once upon a time.") ──▶│
     │◀─── chunk { audio: "base64PCM" } ────│  (repeated)
     │◀─── done ────────────────────────────│
     │──── endStream() ───────────────────▶│
     │                                       │
```

PCM chunks (16-bit, 24kHz, mono) are converted to WAV and emitted as `voice.audio_chunk` events.

### 6. Connection-scoped routing (voice extension → gateway.caller)

The voice extension owns its routing via the `streamOrigins` map:

```typescript
// Voice extension state
streamOrigins: Map<string, string>; // Map<streamId, connectionId>

// Helper for all voice emits
function callerEmitOptions(streamId: string) {
  return {
    connectionId: streamOrigins.get(streamId),
    source: "gateway.caller",
  };
}
```

**When starting a stream:** Voice stores `streamId → connectionId` in `streamOrigins`.

**When emitting audio chunks:** Voice emits with explicit `connectionId` + `source: "gateway.caller"`:

```typescript
ctx.emit(
  "voice.audio_chunk",
  { audio, format, index, streamId, sessionId },
  callerEmitOptions(streamId),
);
```

**Gateway's role is purely generic:** When any event has `source === "gateway.caller"` + `connectionId`, the gateway routes it only to that specific WebSocket connection. The gateway has zero voice-specific code — no `voiceStreamOrigins`, no voice event type checks.

**Cleanup:** `streamOrigins.delete(streamId)` on `voice.stream_end` and `voice.stream_abort`.

### 7. Client audio playback

**Web (useAudioPlayback hook):**

- Decodes base64 WAV → `AudioContext.decodeAudioData()`
- Schedules each buffer on a playback timeline cursor
- Gapless playback: cursor advances by `buffer.duration` after each chunk
- Edge fade (64 samples) reduces clicks at chunk boundaries

**iOS (GatewayClient.swift):**

- Receives `voice.audio_chunk` events with base64 WAV data
- Callbacks to `onAudioChunk` handler for native audio playback

### 8. Audio persistence

After all chunks are emitted and the queue drains, the voice extension concatenates all PCM chunks and saves a complete WAV file:

```
~/.claudia/audio/{sessionId}/{streamId}.wav
```

This enables `voice.replay` to re-serve previously generated audio without re-synthesizing.

## Tags + connectionId Envelope Propagation

Tags and connectionId are **envelope data** — they flow outside method params, through the NDJSON bus:

```
Client WS request (includes tags: ["voice.speak"])
  → Gateway stamps connectionId + forwards tags on NDJSON envelope
  → Extension host sets currentConnectionId + currentTags from envelope
  → Session emits events → extension host auto-stamps connectionId + tags
  → Gateway forwards events to voice with tags on GatewayEvent envelope
  → Voice checks event.tags?.includes("voice.speak") → activates TTS
  → Voice stores streamId → connectionId in streamOrigins
  → Voice emits audio events with explicit { connectionId, source: "gateway.caller" }
  → Gateway routes to specific WS connection via generic gateway.caller mechanism
```

The extension host automatically stamps `currentConnectionId` and `currentTags` on all emitted events. During event/request handler dispatch, it sets these from the inbound envelope and restores them after. Explicit overrides in `ctx.emit()` options take precedence over auto-stamped values — this is how voice emits with a specific connectionId from its `streamOrigins` map.

## Opting In to Voice

Voice is **per-request opt-in** via the `voice.speak` tag. There is no server-side `autoSpeak` config.

For example, clients can opt in like this:

- **Web chat:** Could send `tags: ["voice.speak"]` when voice mode is enabled for a workspace
- **iOS voice mode:** Could send `tags: ["voice.speak"]` on every prompt (it's a voice-first interface)
- **CLI / iMessage:** Would not include a voice tag — responses are text-only
- **Per-workspace control:** A web chat UI could toggle voice on/off per workspace; the tag is only sent when voice is active

If no `voice.speak` tag is present, the voice extension ignores the event entirely — no TTS, no stream, no audio.

## Key Files

| Component           | File                                        | Purpose                                                                            |
| ------------------- | ------------------------------------------- | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| Event propagation   | `packages/gateway/src/index.ts`             | `handleExtensionEvent()`, `broadcastEvent()` — generic `gateway.caller` routing    |
| Tags + connectionId | `packages/extension-host/src/index.ts`      | Auto-stamps `currentConnectionId` + `currentTags` on emitted events                |
| Voice extension     | `extensions/voice/src/index.ts`             | `streamOrigins` map, event subscriptions, stream lifecycle, Cartesia orchestration |
| Sentence chunker    | `extensions/voice/src/sentence-chunker.ts`  | Splits streaming text on sentence boundaries                                       |
| Cartesia client     | `extensions/voice/src/cartesia-stream.ts`   | Per-sentence WebSocket TTS with Sonic 3.0                                          |
| Audio store         | `extensions/voice/src/audio-store.ts`       | Saves complete WAV files for replay                                                |
| Web playback        | `packages/ui/src/hooks/useAudioPlayback.ts` | Web Audio API timeline scheduling                                                  |
| iOS client          | `clients/ios/VoiceMode/GatewayClient.swift` | Native event handling + audio callbacks                                            |
| Shared types        | `packages/shared/src/types.ts`              | `GatewayEvent` with `tags?: string[]`, `ExtensionContext.emit()` options           |
